Gujarat Co-operative Societies Act, 1961: Core Statutory Provisions

Section 4: Societies which may be registered
A society which has as its object the promotion of the economic interests or general welfare of its members or of the public in accordance with co-operative principles, or a society established with the object of facilitating the operations of any such society, may be registered under this Act: Provided that no society shall be registered if, in the opinion of the Registrar, it is likely to be economically unsound or is contrary to the public policy or general welfare.

Section 9: Registration and certificate of registration
(1) If the Registrar is satisfied that a society has complied with the provisions of this Act and the rules, and that its proposed bye-laws are not contrary to this Act or the rules, he may register the society and its bye-laws and grant a certificate of registration.
(2) A certificate of registration signed by the Registrar shall be conclusive evidence that the society therein mentioned is duly registered, unless it is proved that the registration of the society has been cancelled.

Section 22: Rights and duties of members
(1) No person shall exercise the rights of a member of a society until he has made such payment to the society in respect of membership, or acquired such interest in the society, as may be prescribed by the rules or the bye-laws.
(2) Every member of a society shall have the right to inspect the books of accounts, register of members, minute books of general meetings, and annual balance sheet of the society during office hours without payment of any fee.

Section 28: Voting powers of members
(1) No member of any society shall have more than one vote in the affairs of the society: Provided that in the case of an equality of votes, the Chairman shall have a casting vote.
(2) A member shall exercise his vote in person and not by proxy, save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act.

Section 36: Expulsion of members
(1) A society may, by resolution passed by three-fourths majority of the members present and voting at a general meeting called for the purpose, expel a member for acts which are detrimental to the proper working of the society or the interest of its members:
Provided that no resolution for expulsion shall be valid unless the member concerned has been given an opportunity of representing his case to the general body.
(2) No resolution for expulsion shall take effect unless it is approved by the Registrar within sixty days from the date of communication of such resolution.

Section 73: Final authority in society and management of committee
(1) The final authority in every society shall vest in the general body of members in general meeting, subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules.
(2) The management of every society shall vest in a managing committee constituted in accordance with this Act, the rules and the bye-laws, which shall exercise all powers and perform all duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it.

Section 77: Annual general meeting
(1) Every society shall, within a period of six months next after the date fixed for making up its accounts for the year under the rules for the time being in force, call a general meeting of its members:
Provided that the Registrar may, on application by the society, extend the period for holding such meeting by a further period not exceeding three months.
(2) If default is made in calling the annual general meeting within the specified period, the Registrar or any person authorized by him may call such meeting.

Section 84: Audit of accounts of societies
(1) The Registrar shall audit, or cause to be audited by a person authorized by him by general or special order in writing in this behalf, the accounts of every society at least once in each year.
(2) The audit under sub-section (1) shall include an examination of overdue debts, if any, the verification of cash balance and securities, and a valuation of the assets and liabilities of the society.
(3) The auditor shall have access to all books, accounts, papers, and securities of the society, and every officer or member shall furnish necessary information.

Section 96: Disputes to be referred to Registrar and Board of Nominees
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, any dispute touching the constitution, management or business of a society shall be referred to the Registrar, if the parties thereto are among members, past members or persons claiming through them, or between a member and the society or its managing committee.
(2) When any dispute is referred to the Registrar, the Registrar may decide the dispute himself, or refer it for disposal to the Gujarat Co-operative Tribunal or a Board of Nominees.

Section 107: Winding up and appointment of Liquidator
(1) If the Registrar, after an inquiry has been held under section 86 or on an application made by not less than three-fourths of the members of a society, is of opinion that the society ought to be wound up, he may issue an order directing it to be wound up.
(2) The Registrar may appoint a competent person to be Liquidator of the society and fix his remuneration. On the appointment of a Liquidator, all assets of the society shall vest in the Liquidator.
