Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959: Core Statutory Provisions

Section 6: Application for registration of co-operative societies
(1) An application for registration of a co-operative society shall be made to the Registrar in such form as may be prescribed, accompanied by three copies of the proposed bye-laws of the society.
(2) Every such application shall be signed by at least ten persons qualified for membership under section 16, who reside in the area of operation of the society.

Section 7: Registration of societies
(1) If the Registrar is satisfied that an application complies with the provisions of this Act and the rules, that the proposed bye-laws are in accordance with co-operative principles and are not contrary to this Act, and that the society has reasonable prospects of functioning successfully, he may register the society and its bye-laws.
(2) On registration, the Registrar shall issue a certificate of registration signed by him, which shall be conclusive evidence of registration.

Section 16: Persons who may become members
(1) No person shall be admitted as a member of a co-operative society except an individual competent to contract under section 11 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, any other co-operative society, or the State Government.
(2) No individual shall be eligible for admission as a member of a society if he has been convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude, or has been declared an insolvent.

Section 21: Voting powers and rights of members
(1) Every member of a co-operative society shall have one vote in the affairs of the society.
(2) In the case of an equality of votes, the Chairman shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.
(3) A member shall exercise his vote in person and no member shall be permitted to vote by proxy.
(4) Every member is entitled to inspect the accounts, registers, audit notes, and records of the society during specified office hours.

Section 27: General body meetings and Annual General Meeting
(1) Every co-operative society shall, within a period of six months after the close of the co-operative year, convene an annual general meeting of its members.
(2) The annual general meeting shall consider the annual report of activities, the audit report and audited balance sheet, the disposal of net profits, the election of members of the committee, and the annual budget for the next year.

Section 28A: Management of co-operative societies and Committee
(1) The management of every co-operative society shall vest in a committee constituted in accordance with the Act, rules, and bye-laws.
(2) The term of office of the elected members of the committee shall be five years from the date of election.
(3) The committee shall exercise all powers and discharge all duties required for the proper administration of the society.

Section 63: Audit of accounts of co-operative societies
(1) Every co-operative society shall get its accounts audited at least once in each year by an auditor or auditing firm appointed by the general body of the co-operative society from among the panel approved by the Director of Co-operative Audit.
(2) The audit shall be completed within a period of six months from the close of the co-operative year.
(3) The audit report shall be submitted to the society and the Registrar within one month from the date of completion of the audit.

Section 70: Disputes which may be referred to Registrar for arbitration
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, if any dispute touching the constitution, management, or the business of a co-operative society arises among members, past members, or between a member and the committee, such dispute shall be referred to the Registrar for decision and no civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit in respect of such dispute.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), any claim by a society for any debt or demand due to it from a member shall be deemed to be a dispute touching the business of the society.

Section 72: Winding up of co-operative societies
(1) If the Registrar, after an audit has been conducted under section 63 or an inquiry has been held under section 64, is of the opinion that the society ought to be wound up, he may issue an interim order directing the winding up of the society.
(2) The Registrar may appoint any person to be a Liquidator of the society and determine his remuneration and powers.
