Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002: Core Statutory Provisions

Section 5: Multi-State co-operative societies which may be registered
(1) No multi-state co-operative society shall be registered under this Act unless its main objects are to serve the interests of members in more than one State, and its bye-laws provide for social and economic betterment of its members through self-help and mutual aid in accordance with the co-operative principles.
(2) The Central Registrar may register a multi-state co-operative society if he is satisfied that the society has complied with the provisions of this Act and the rules.

Section 7: Registration and Certificate of Registration
(1) An application for registration of a multi-state co-operative society shall be submitted to the Central Registrar signed by at least fifty persons from each of the States concerned.
(2) On registration of a multi-state co-operative society, the Central Registrar shall issue a certificate of registration which shall be conclusive evidence that the society is registered under this Act.

Section 25: Persons who may become members
(1) No person shall be admitted as a member of a multi-state co-operative society except an individual competent to contract under section 11 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, any multi-state co-operative society or any co-operative society, the Central Government, or a State Government.
(2) Every member of a multi-state co-operative society shall have the right to attend general meetings, exercise voting rights, and inspect books of accounts and audit reports.

Section 29: Voting rights of members
(1) Every member of a multi-state co-operative society shall have one vote in the affairs of the society.
(2) In the case of an equality of votes, the chairperson shall have a casting vote.
(3) A member shall exercise voting rights in person and not through a proxy.

Section 39: General body, its constitution, powers and functions
(1) The ultimate authority of a multi-state co-operative society shall vest in the general body of its members: Provided that where the area of operation of a multi-state co-operative society is divided into areas, the general body may consist of delegates elected by members.
(2) The annual general meeting shall be convened within a period of six months of the close of the financial year to review performance, approve the annual budget, and receive the auditor's report.

Section 45: Elections of members of board
(1) The conduct of elections to the board of a multi-state co-operative society shall be the responsibility of the existing board in accordance with the rules and the bye-laws.
(2) The election shall be held by secret ballot in the manner prescribed before the expiry of the term of office of the outgoing board members.

Section 70: Appointment and remuneration of auditors
(1) Every multi-state co-operative society shall cause its accounts to be audited at least once in each year by a chartered accountant within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.
(2) The auditor shall be appointed by the general body of the multi-state co-operative society at each annual general meeting and shall hold office until the conclusion of the next annual general meeting.
(3) The auditor shall make a report to the members on the accounts examined by him and on every balance sheet and profit and loss account.

Section 84: Reference of disputes
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, if any dispute touching the constitution, management or business of a multi-state co-operative society arises among members, past members or between a member and the board, such dispute shall be referred to arbitration.
(2) The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 shall apply to all arbitrations under this section as if the proceedings were pursuant to an arbitration agreement.

Section 86: Winding up of multi-state co-operative societies
(1) If the Central Registrar, after an audit has been conducted under section 70 or an inquiry has been held under section 78, is of opinion that the multi-state co-operative society ought to be wound up, he may make an order directing the winding up of the society.
(2) The Central Registrar may appoint a Liquidator for the purpose and fix his remuneration.
